This is an extraordinary time in history for teachers and their students. Now more than ever, we have the opportunity to help kids (and each other) learn how to be kind and compassionate human beings.

Participants in the GGSC’s Summer Institute for Educators.
Participants in the GGSC's Summer Institute for Educators.
The Greater Good Science Center’s Education Program aspires to provide education professionals with a deeper scientific understanding of social-emotional learning, mindfulness, and other positive youth development practices.

We don’t just do this through our articles, of course. We also offer a Summer Institutes for Educators, workshops, curricula, resources, and consulting. All these tools work together to try to help teachers and school leaders in their journey—building healthier classrooms and schools.

Here are the ten best articles of 2017, based on composite ranking of pageviews and editors’ picks.

What Don’t We Know about Gratitude and Youth? by Giacomo Bono: Gratitude helped Giacomo Bono survive a childhood disease. Now he’s trying to understand how to help kids cultivate thankfulness.

How to Change the Story About Students of Color, by Dena Simmons: Dena Simmons explores how educators can inadvertently harm students of color—and what we can do to bring out their best.

How One School is Teaching Empathy after the Election, by Michael Fisher: The story of a group of sixth graders learning to bridge political divides after the U.S. election.

Tips for Helping Kids Adopt a Growth Mindset, by Amy L. Eva: Parents and educators can teach kids to change their fixed mindsets and see more potential in themselves and other people.

How Social-Emotional Skills Can Fit into School Curricula, by Vicki Zakrzewski: K-12 teachers offer practical—and fun!—ways that social-emotional learning can be integrated into traditional lessons.

Four Ways to Gain Perspective on Negative Events, by Amy L. Eva: Here are four simple techniques for “self-distancing,” a research-tested way to break cycles of rumination and recrimination.

How to Help Teens Become More Self-Compassionate, by Karen Bluth: Self-compassion may be key to supporting teen mental health. Dr. Karen Bluth shares lessons from her mindful self-compassion program.

Three Social-Emotional Skills You Need to Discuss Race in Classrooms, by Amy L. Eva: Students are talking about race and racism. Social-emotional skills can help keep those discussions civil and empathic.